OPEN ACCESS


EDITED BY
Sonia Brito-Costa,
Instituto Politécnico de Coimbra, Portugal


REVIEWED BY
Veronica Tutte,
Universidad Católica del Uruguay, Uruguay
Pedro Luis Rodríguez García,
University of Murcia, Spain


*CORRESPONDENCE
Maria-Jesus Lirola

mariajesus.lirola@ual.es


SPECIALTY SECTION
This article was submitted to
Movement Science and Sport Psychology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Psychology


RECEIVED 06 January 2023

ACCEPTED 30 January 2023

PUBLISHED 21 February 2023


CITATION
Cerezuela J-L, Lirola M-J and Cangas AJ
(2023) Pickleball and mental health in adults:
A systematic review.
_Front. Psychol._ 14:1137047.
[doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1137047](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1137047)


COPYRIGHT
© 2023 Cerezuela, Lirola and Cangas. This is an
open-access article distributed under the terms
[of the Creative Commons Attribution License](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
[(CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)
other forums is permitted, provided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are
credited and that the original publication in this
journal is cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not
comply with these terms.



[TYPE Systematic Review](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/psychology#editorial-board)

[PUBLISHED 21 February 2023](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/psychology#editorial-board)

[DOI 10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1137047](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1137047)

# Pickleball and mental health in adults: A systematic review


Juan-Leandro Cerezuela [1], Maria-Jesus Lirola [2] - and
Adolfo J. Cangas [2]


1Faculty of Education Sciences, University of Almería, Almería, Spain, 2Department of Psychology, University
of Almería, Almería, Spain


Introduction: Physical activity has been extensively studied and numerous mental

health benefits have been found. Pickleball is an emerging racquet sport, which is

characterized by its accessibility to all audiences and has become especially popular

in the United States among the elderly. It is a novel team game and its inclusive nature

is innovative for health improvement. The purpose of this systematic review was to

review and evaluate existing studies that have examined the effects of pickleball on

the mental and psychological health of individuals.


Methods: A systematic review was conducted on articles found in Scopus, PubMed,

Elsevier, Web of Science (WoS), PsyINFO, Dialnet, and Elton B. Stephens Company

(EBESCO) from 1975 to the present. The keywords used was a five combination

between “Pickleball” joint with different terms by the connector AND, the second

part of the combo could be “mental disorder” OR “anxiety” OR “depression” OR

“psychological health” OR “mental health.” Eligibility criteria included: papers focused

on pickleball, in English or Spanish, on mental health variables, without establishing

an age range. We excluded duplicate works, without access or that did not address

the objective of this study.


Results: The search resulted in 63 papers, of which 13 were selected. A total

of 90.74% of the population were people over 50 years of age. The results

show significant improvements in the different psychological variables measured

in pickleball practitioners: personal wellbeing, life satisfaction, depression, stress,

happiness, etc., pickleball shows potential as a new tool to work and improve

people’s mental health.


Conclusions: The pickleball is displayed as an inclusive sport that does not need

adaptations, resulting of great interest to be worked in different populations with

mental problems.


KEYWORDS


inclusive sport, physical activity, mental disorder, mental health, wellbeing

## Introduction


Physical activity and sport have been widely studied, given the benefits in physical health
and fitness improvement that arise from their practice (Granero-Gallegos et al., 2020; Medellín
Ruiz et al., 2020; Manresa-Rocamora et al., 2021). However, physical-sport activity has also
been shown to be a useful tool for achieving benefits in people’s mental health (White et al.,
2017; Kandola et al., 2019). Chillón-Garzón et al. (2002), understand physical-sport activity
as a physical activity whose objective is oriented toward health, moving away from sporting
performance. Given the wide-ranging benefits it offers, it is of great interest to look for new



[Frontiers in Psychology](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/psychology) 01 [frontiersin.org](https://www.frontiersin.org/)


Cerezuela et al. [10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1137047](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1137047)



practices that are innovative in order to encourage the greatest
possible number of people to take part in physical sport. Pickleball
is an emerging sport that has experienced exponential growth in
the United States in recent years. Although so far it has been most
popular among veteran athletes and elderly people (Ryu et al., 2018;
Vitale and Liu, 2020), it has characteristics that make it possible for all
ages to practice, suggesting the potential for working on the benefits
that this emerging sport modality can have on mental health.


The psychological benefits of physical and
sporting activity


The inclusive nature that pickleball intrinsically produces, leads
us to consider the potential of this sport in the field of mental health,
as recognized by the World Health Organisation Regional Office for
Europe (2016). Physical activity and sport can play a fundamental role
in improving social inclusion and adapting healthy lifestyles in people
with mental health problems.
The population with mental disorders benefits from the practice
of physical activity in order to break with stereotypes, design and
implement mechanisms of action that break with the stigma that
weighs on these people, which has a negative effect on their social
relationships (Casado et al., 2020). It is necessary to propose different
anti-stigma programmes that help to favor this community of
people (Cangas et al., 2017; Gallego et al., 2020). In this sense,
the practice of physical and sporting activity has a positive effect
on the mental health of users (Silverman and Deuster, 2014).
People with stress and depression benefit from the functioning of
the brain and hormonal systems that are triggered during their
practice, which is essential for the improvement of various mental
disorders (Portugal et al., 2013). This population has its symptoms
reduced through sporting activities that generate adherence to regular
exercise (Deslandes et al., 2009). Furthermore, physical activity
complements the different pharmacological treatments, alleviating
symptoms (Blumenthal et al., 2007). However, as suggested by
Lawrence et al. (2010) and Stubbs et al. (2016), people with various
mental disorders such as schizophrenia may have a high prevalence
of risk factors or pathologies: obesity, dyslipidaemia, smoking,
hypertension, hyperglycemia, and physical inactivity that worsen
their mental, physical, and social health. At the same time, they have
a lower cardiorespiratory capacity than the rest of the population.
In the same vein, Mandini et al. (2022) reported that cognitive
functions of people with schizophrenia were significantly related to
guided walking programmes. In fact, walking has been indicated as
an enjoyable activity with ameliorative outcomes for people with
mental disorders, which highlights the resilience capacity to resist and
cope with problems and demands by demonstrating an attitude of
coping (Schetter and Dolbier, 2011). This resilience is closely linked
to physical activity and psychological distress, stress, or anxiety,
which can inform the design of interventions to improve mental
health through physical activity (To et al., 2022). Training and socioeducational sports programmes can favor the recovery and social
inclusion of people with mental health problems, generating an
environment of healthy relationships at different levels (Cangas et al.,
2019).
Although the psychological benefits of physical-sporting activity
have been notably confirmed, however, its benefits using new sporting
practices have not yet been analyzed. One of the physical-sporting



practices that has been booming in recent decades has been pickleball.
This practice is characterized by its great versatility and applicability
to all types of participants, which makes it extremely attractive
for intervention programmes aimed at improving the psychological
health of the individual.


Origin and characteristics of pickleball


According to information obtained from the (United States
Amateur Pickleball Association, 2022, p. 21), pickleball is a game
created by Joel Pritchard (Senator of the State of Washington)
together with Bell and McCallum in 1965 on Bainbridge Island.
The idea for the sport was born out of a family need to design a
game that would be fun and inclusive for all members of the family.
After playing golf one summer Saturday, Joel Pritchard, and Bill
Bell, a successful businessman, returned to the Pritchard home on
Bainbridge Island, WA (near Seattle) to find their families sitting
around with nothing to do. The property had an old badminton
court, so Pritchard and Bell searched for badminton equipment and
couldn’t find a complete set of rackets. They improvised and started
playing with ping-pong paddles and a perforated plastic ball. At first
they set the net at a badminton height of 60 inches and volleyed
the ball over the net. As the weekend progressed, the players found
that the ball bounced well off the asphalt surface and soon lowered
the net to 36 inches. The following weekend, Barney McCallum was
introduced to the game at Pritchard’s house. Soon, the three men were
creating rules, based largely on badminton. They did not lose sight of
the original goal, which was to provide a game that the whole family
could play.
Joan Pritchard invented the name “pickle ball,” a reference to the
nautical term “pickle boat,” which refers to the last boat to finish a
race. However, it has been popularly believed that the name comes
from Pritchard’s family dog, a Cocker Spaniel named Pickles, whose
fondness for the ball inspired the owner to name the sport after it.
While it is true that this family had a dog named Pickles, the sport
was created and named a few years before the animal became part of
the family, and the sport was named after him.
The first permanent pickleball court was built in the backyard of
Bob O’Brian, Joel Pritchard’s friend and neighbor ( **Figure 1** ).


FIGURE 1

Original pickleball track. USAPA (United States Amateur Pickleball
Association, 2022).



[Frontiers in Psychology](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/psychology) 02 [frontiersin.org](https://www.frontiersin.org/)


Cerezuela et al. [10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1137047](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1137047)



In the spring of 1976 the world’s first known pickleball
tournament was held at the South Center Athletic Club in Tukwila,
Washington. David Lester won the men’s singles and Steve Paranto
came second. Many of the participants were college tennis players
who knew very little about pickleball.
The United States Amateur Pickleball Association was organized
to perpetuate the growth and advancement of pickleball nationally.
The first rules were published in March 1984.
The game of pickleball was first introduced at the Arizona
Senior Olympics (United States Amateur Pickleball Association,
2022) thanks to the efforts of Earl Hill. The tournament was played at
Happy Trails RV Resort in Surprise (United States Amateur Pickleball
Association, 2022; **Figure 2** ).
The game is a combination of tennis, table tennis, and badminton.
It is mainly played as a doubles game, but can also be played as a
singles game. A small plastic ball with holes in it is used. This ball
reaches a lower speed than other racket sports during the game.
Players hit the ball with a racket or paddle whose standard size is
40 cm × 20 cm. They are larger than those used in table tennis,
but smaller than those used in paddle tennis. It is played on a
court similar to a badminton court. Its measurements are 6.1 m
wide × 13.41 m long. With a net 86.36 cm high, arranged in the
centre of the court in the same way as tennis. One of the main
characteristics of this game is the presence of an area of the court,
known as the non-volley or kitchen area (see **Figure 3** ). Players may
not hit the ball directly into this area unless they have previously
voted. Matches are played to 11 points, and must be won by two
points difference. To score, the player must win the point during his
service [International Federation of Pickleball (IFP), 2022].
Pickleball does not place as much emphasis on the technical
gesture as other racquet sports, but maintains a greater strategic


FIGURE 2

Logo of the United States Amateur Pickleball Association. USAPA
(United States Amateur Pickleball Association, 2022).


FIGURE 3

Dimensions of the pickleball court. USAPA (United States Amateur
Pickleball Association, 2022).



and tactical element (Michael and Webster, 2020), which translates
into a skills-based learning model (Bunker and Thorpe, 1982).
One of the fundamental skills in this sport is the Dink, which
consists of placing the ball in the opponent’s kitchen, with the
aim of making it difficult for the opponent to attack (Zagrodnik,
2019). Due to the speed of the ball, it allows working on speed,
agility, strategy, control and coordination in a very balanced way,
positively involving cardiopulmonary capacity along with muscular
condition (Wasem, 1994). Given these characteristics, pickleball
is an easy sport to practice and accessible to all audiences. It
is both economical and quick to set up on any hard court
(Wray et al., 2021).
Research has repeatedly noted the psychological benefits of
physical exercise (Hosker et al., 2019; Rodriguez-Ayllon et al., 2019).
However, the field of physical exercise is a reality in flux and
new practices are constantly emerging that aim to bring its use
closer to the individual. One of the new practices is pickleball,
which has the potential to work on and improve the mental health
of its practitioners. Therefore, the aim of this paper is to review
and evaluate existing studies that have examined the relationship
between pickleball and the mental and psychological health of
individuals.

## Materials and methods


Location of studies


For the elaboration of this systematic review, it has been
followed the principles set out in PRISMA statement (Moher, 2009),
updated by Page et al. (2021). A literature review was conducted
in the following databases: Scopus, PubMed, Elsevier, Web of
Science (WoS), PsyINFO, Dialnet, and Elton B. Stephens Company
(EBESCO) (including CINAHL, PsicoDoc, ERIC, Education Source
and Medline), in order to compile different research studies written
about pickleball between January 1975 (the year in which this sport
began to expand) and December 2022.
The keywords used was a five combination between “Pickleball”
joint with different terms by the connector AND, the second
part of the combo could be “mental disorder” OR “anxiety” OR
“depression” OR “psychological health” OR “mental health,” limiting
the search to texts written in Spanish and English. The review of the
information was completed with the bibliographic references found
in the previous searches.


Eligibility criteria


Considering the inclusion and exclusion criteria defined below
for this study, the articles/studies were reviewed in two phases. Firstly,
the title and abstract of the papers were reviewed and, secondly, the
full text was reviewed.


Inclusion criteria

The publications located in the literature search were
considered eligible if they met the following criteria: (a) papers
focusing exclusively on pickleball; (b) only papers published
in English or Spanish, as these are the languages known to
the author of this paper; (c) papers that, at least in some of



[Frontiers in Psychology](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/psychology) 03 [frontiersin.org](https://www.frontiersin.org/)


Cerezuela et al. [10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1137047](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1137047)



their variables, address mental, and psychological health; (d)
empirical articles, including both observational and experimental
studies; (e) as well as qualitative studies; (f) no age range of
the participants was established for the selection of the articles;
(g) the papers were not considered eligible for inclusion in the
literature search.


Exclusion criteria

The located works were excluded based on some of the
following criteria: (a) duplicate works; (b) works that had only
an abstract; (c) works whose access was not possible through
the databases or the request to the author/s; (d) works whose
content was didactic programming on this sport or any other
content that did not include an empirical study; (e) works that
did not address the relationship established in the objective of
this study; (f); works that included pickleball in multi-sport
programmes; (g) works that did not include pickleball in multisport programmes.


Data coding procedure


Information was extracted from each study and coded with the
following structure:


 - Author (name of first author and year of study).

 - Number of participants and gender.

 - Age of participants.

 - Type of study.

 - Instruments.

 - Variables.

 - Results found.


In case of observational and longitudinal studies based on
an intervention, the weeks of intervention, description of the
programme, duration, and frequency were extracted.


Quality index of selected studies


In order to guarantee a higher methodological quality of the
reviewed and selected studies, a quality index based on four items
belonging to the Strengthening the Reporting of Observational
Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) Statement (Von Elm et al.,
2007) was developed and applied. Firstly, the objective stated in
the papers is analyzed by analyzing whether they indicate specific
objectives, as well as the inclusion of any pre-established hypotheses.
Secondly, the involvement of the participants is established, taking
into account whether the selected papers clearly state the reason
for sample selection, age and gender. A higher score is given
for longitudinal studies than for cross-sectional studies in order
to positively assess the involvement and impact of studies that
follow up over time. Finally, we took into account whether the
studies analyzed variables in a clear and well-established way,
clearly defining outcomes, exposures and predictors, controlling
for possible confounding, and effect-modifying variables (see
**Table 1** ).



TABLE 1 Quality index of included studies.







|Col1|Item|Criteria|Rating|
|---|---|---|---|
|1|Objective|Indicates speciﬁc objectives<br>and hypotheses|1|
|2|Participants|Deﬁned|1|
|2|Participants|Not deﬁned|0|
|3|Study type|Experimental|3|
|3|Study type|Quasi-experimental|3|
|3|Study type|Longitudinal|2|
|3|Study type|Cross-sectional|1|
|3|Study type|Correlational|1|
|3|Study type|Qualitative|1|
|3|Study type|Descriptive|0|
|4|Variables|Clearly described|1|
|4|Variables|Not described|0|

## Results

Given the limited literature on this sport, only 63 articles were
found from all the databases reviewed. After discarding all papers
that did not meet the inclusion/exclusion criteria, the total number
of studies was reduced to 13. The type of studies found were mostly
quantitative, observational, cross-sectional, and correlational. Only
three longitudinal studies were found, of which only one was quasiexperimental. No qualitative articles were found. **Figure 4** shows the
flowchart of the literature search carried out.


Quality assessment


The quality assessment of the included studies ( **Figure 4** ) was
performed on a quality scale based on four items belonging to
STROBE (Von Elm et al., 2007). The overall mean score of the quality
index of the included studies was 4.15 out of a possible total score of 6.

**Table 1** shows the established criteria with the assigned score.
**Table 2** shows the score obtained by each of the studies.


TABLE 2 Quality of studies.


|References|Quality|
|---|---|
|Reynolds et al., 2016|5|
|Heo et al., 2018a|4|
|Ryu et al., 2018|4|
|Heo et al., 2018b|4|
|Gill and Swartz, 2019|2|
|Ryu et al., 2018, 2020|4|
|Kim et al., 2020|4|
|Casper et al., 2021|5|
|Kim et al., 2021|4|
|Wray et al., 2021|6|
|Buzzelli and Draper, 2020|4|
|Casper and Jeon, 2019|4|
|Chen et al., 2021|4|



[Frontiers in Psychology](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/psychology) 04 [frontiersin.org](https://www.frontiersin.org/)


Cerezuela et al. [10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1137047](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1137047)



FIGURE 4

Flow chart.


Overview of the reviewed studies


**Table 3** provides an overview of the different interventions
reviewed with information on different variables of interest (e.g.,
number of women and men, age, type of study, instruments,
variables, and outcomes) for each of the 13 articles reviewed. Of the
13 papers reviewed, we found eight correlational studies measuring
the association between two or more psychological variables. One
observational study based on a tournament conducted over time with
a final collection of data for analysis is analyzed. A cross-sectional
study examining the effects of pickleball on task orientation and ego.
The total study population is 5,405 participants, with 4,905 people

_>_ 50 years old (90.74%). Of which 761 men and 723 women have been
identified.
Of the total papers analyzed, three of them conducted a
longitudinal study (Reynolds et al., 2016; Casper et al., 2021; Wray
et al., 2021) where the evolution of the different variables established
at different points in time was observed. Of these three, the most
striking study, despite presenting a smaller study sample, is the
pickleball-based intervention by Wray et al. (2021). This study
applied a 6-week programme in a rural population with a high
level of sedentary lifestyles, in order to measure different physical
and psychological fitness variables. They showed highly significant
improvements in jumping ability, cognitive performance, and selfperceived pain.

On the other hand, different studies (Heo et al., 2018a,b;
Ryu et al., 2018) correlated, through self-reported questionnaire
responses, life satisfaction, serious leisure, life orientation, loneliness,
social integration, and major depression in elderly people who
were accustomed to playing pickleball. They found that this sport
focused on serious leisure was negatively correlated with depression,
increased life satisfaction, decreased loneliness, increased quality of



life, and suggested greater social integration, which in turn was
greater in women. Serious leisure is understood as “the systematic
pursuit of a basic amateur, hobby or volunteer activity that people
find so substantial, interesting and satisfying that, in the typical case,
they embark on a (leisure) career focused on acquiring and expressing
a combination of their special skills, knowledge and experience”
(Stebbins, 2016, p. 5).
Furthermore, Kim et al. (2020), Ryu et al. (2020), and Kim et al.
(2021), analyzed the relationships between perceived stress, serious
leisure, authenticity, participation and social capital with happiness
in older pickleball players. The results of the study suggest that
participation, social capital, and leisure predict happiness. At the
same time, happiness and authenticity decrease perceived stress.
Regarding the studies that were conducted by Buzzelli and Draper
(2020), together with that of Casper and Jeon (2019), they stand
out for presenting the highest samples, specifically with samples
of 3,012 and 690 participants, respectively. Buzzelli and Draper
(2020) highlighted the innovative approach of pickleball compared
to other competitive sports. They emphasized task mastery and skill
mastery over ego. In general, participants in this study reported
being more intrinsically motivated than extrinsically motivated and,
in particular, were more motivated by a sense of accomplishment and
reported being more task-oriented. Casper and Jeon (2019) in turn,
highlighted the advantages of increasing practice time to enhance
competition, enjoyment, fitness, skill mastery, and socialization.
Finally, we find, on the one hand, the study conducted by Gill
and Swartz (2019) on a proposed sports model. This model seeks
to analyze the possible benefits of pickleball as a team sport where
its members form a strong bond. They establish a model formula
on weak and strong bonds to perform this analysis. On the other
hand, the study by Chen et al. (2021), which introduces the variable
of wellbeing. In this study they found a positive correlation with
satisfaction toward leisure.

## Discussion


The aim of this research was to review the studies that analyze
the relationship between pickleball and the mental health of the
people who practice it. To this end, 13 studies were selected that met
the established inclusion criteria. The participants in these studies
were 90.75% older people, aged between 50 and 83 years. Practically
all of the studies found were carried out on this sector of the
population. This suggests the possibilities of generating reinsertion
and physical-sports habits which, as analyzed by Lera-López and
Suárez-Fernández (2019) tend to be abandoned as age increases. In
this sense, pickleball, given its ease of play and low-impact nature,
can be an enjoyable way for people of all ages to stay active and fit and
help promote a healthy lifestyle (Changstrom et al., 2021). This results
in more effective and enjoyable physical activity for populations with
more barriers to accessing physical sporting activity, thus promoting
healthy sporting activity, which does not generate stress and trigger
frustrations and a range of mental disorders resulting from high
competition (Armstrong and VanHeest, 2002; Schaal et al., 2011).
Various sports programmes such as the one analyzed by Walter
et al. (2021), despite showing short-term benefits in different
psychological disorders such as depression or anxiety, soon after the
end of the programme they worsen again. On the contrary, pickleball



[Frontiers in Psychology](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/psychology) 05 [frontiersin.org](https://www.frontiersin.org/)


Cerezuela et al. [10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1137047](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1137047)


TABLE 3 Characteristics of the reviewed studies.






































































|References|Participants<br>(N; gender)|Sample<br>characteristics;<br>age|Type of study|Variables|Instruments|Results found|
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
|Reynolds et al.,<br>2016|_N_ = 48; 24 older<br>adults; 24<br>students|_>_65 years;<br>undergraduates|Intergenerational<br>pickleball<br>tournament for a<br>duration of 3 months|Intergenerational<br>inclusion|Two qualitative feedback<br>from students|Positive impact of pickleball<br>tournament on intergenerational<br>inclusion.|
|Heo et al., 2018a|_N_ = 153; M: 63;<br>W: 90|Pickleball players;<br>_>_50 years old|Correlational study|Personal wellbeing<br>loneliness<br>Serious leisure<br>Life satisfaction|SWB: SWLS<br>SLIM<br>Loneliness scale|Pickleball as leisure predicts SWB<br>and quality of life,_ p <_ 0.01.|
|Ryu et al., 2018|_N_ = 153; M: 63;<br>W: 90|Pickleball players;<br>_>_50 years old|Correlational study|Life satisfaction<br>Social integration<br>Optimism|SWLS<br>LOT<br>Social integration|Higher SWLS in retirees vs.<br>non-retirees who play pickleball.<br>Higher social integration in women,<br>_p <_ 0.05.|
|Heo et al., 2018b|_N_ = 153; M: 63;<br>W: 90|Pickleball players;<br>_>_50 years old|Correlational study|Depression<br>Serious Leisure<br>Social Integration<br>Optimism|MDI<br>SLIM<br>Social integration<br>LOT|Negative correlation between<br>depression and serious leisure in<br>pickleball players,_ p <_ 0.01.|
|Gill and Swartz,<br>2019|Tuesday league<br>_N_ = 135;<br>Monday league<br>_N_ = 166; M: 84;<br>W: 82|Active pickleball<br>players belonging to<br>Tuesday’s men league<br>and Monday mixed<br>league|Proposed sport<br>model<br>Descriptive study|Strong bond|Model formula on weak and<br>strong ties|Pickleball is a sport with strong team<br>bonds.|
|Ryu et al., 2020|_N_ = 208; M: 112;<br>W: 96|Pickleball players;<br>50–83 years old|Correlational study|Authenticity<br>Stress<br>Happiness|Authenticity inventory<br>PSS-4<br>Happiness|Authenticity signiﬁcantly associated<br>with reduced perceived stress and<br>greater happiness,_ p <_ 0.01.|
|Kim et al., 2020|_N_ = 208; M: 112;<br>W: 96|Pickleball players;<br>50–83 years old|Correlational study|Level of<br>participation<br>pickleball<br>Social capital<br>Happiness|SLIM<br>Perceived social capital<br>questionnaire<br>Happiness|Pickleball participation and<br>perceived social capital predict<br>perceived happiness,_ p <_ 0.001.|
|Casper et al.,<br>2021|_N_ = 36|Pickleball players;<br>_>_65 years old|Observational and<br>longitudinal study<br>pre-COVID and<br>during COVID|Level of<br>participation<br>pickleball<br>Social connections<br>Personal wellbeing|Sports participation<br>Social connections<br>SF-12<br>ULS-4<br>SWLS|Lower participation in pickleball<br>correlates with lower life satisfaction,<br>_p <_ 0.05.|
|Kim et al., 2021|_N_ = 208; M: 112;<br>W: 96|Pickleball players;<br>50–83 years old|Correlational study|Level of<br>participation<br>pickleball<br>Social capital<br>Happiness|Sports participation<br>Social connections<br>Happiness|Participation and social connections<br>predict happiness.<br>_p <_ 0.001.<br>Connections predict participation,<br>_p <_ 0.001.|
|Wray et al., 2021|_N_ = 20; M: 17;<br>W: 3|Rural adults;<br>50–75 years|Longitudinal study<br>Quasi-experimental<br>6 weeks<br>three classes/week of<br>60 min.<br>Pre-test and<br>post-test.|Muscle function<br>Cognitive function<br>Pain<br>Cardio metabolic<br>risk|Hand-held dynamometer<br>High jumps<br>Neuropsychological tests<br>NPRS<br>HRV<br>Interviews|Improvements in vertical jump<br>height,_ p <_ 0.01.<br>Cognitive performance and<br>self-reported pain,_ p <_ 0.05.|
|Buzzelli and<br>Draper, 2020|_N_ = 3,012|Mage = 63.17 years;<br>3 years of pickleball<br>experience|Estudio transversal|Sport motivation<br>Task orientation<br>Ego orientation|SMS<br>Task and ego orientation in<br>sport questionnaire<br>QIRS|Participants reported being more<br>task-oriented than ego-oriented in<br>pickleball.|
|Casper and Jeon,<br>2019|_N_ = 690|_>_55 years old|Cross-sectional study|Conscientiousness,<br>attraction,<br>attachment, and<br>loyalty|PCM<br>Sport questionnaire|Longer pickleball playing time is<br>associated with higher PCM,<br>_p <_ 0.01.|
|Chen et al., 2021|_N_ = 215; M: 135;<br>W: 80|Pickleball players;<br>_<_20 years old: 39;<br>21–30 years old: 73;<br>31–40 years old: 34;<br>41–50 years old: 29;<br>51–60 years old: 25;<br>_>_61 years old: 15|Correlational study|Leisure<br>participation<br>Leisure satisfaction<br>Personal wellbeing|Satisfaction, leisure<br>participation, and wellbeing<br>questionnaire<br>Wellbeing|Satisfaction has signiﬁcant<br>relationship with wellbeing and<br>leisure participation._ p <_ 0.001 in<br>pickleball players.<br>Leisure participation is not<br>signiﬁcantly related to wellbeing in<br>pickleball players.|



SWLS, satisfaction with life scale; SLIM, serious leisure inventory measures; LOT, life orientation test; MDI, major depression inventory; PSS-4, perceived stress scale; SF-12, health survey; ULS-4,
UCLA loneliness scale-4; NPRS, pain rating scale; SMS, sport motivation scale; TEOSQ, task and ego orientation in sport questionnaire; QIRS, quality and importance of recreational services; PCM,
psychological continuum model (Competition, Fun, Fitness, Skills Mastery, and Socialization); HRV, heart rate variability.


[Frontiers in Psychology](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/psychology) 06 [frontiersin.org](https://www.frontiersin.org/)


Cerezuela et al. [10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1137047](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1137047)



is shown to be a sport with great inclusive and intergenerational
possibilities (Reynolds et al., 2016), which is of great interest for its
application in people with mental disorders. The studies analyzed
reflect the great importance and potential impact of pickleball in
this field. On the one hand, personal wellbeing and life satisfaction,
showing itself as a promoter of health effects and on the other
hand, Pickleball as an agent with preventive effects by reducing
depression symptoms, indicating high values in its participants in
both directions. Similarly, to other physical-sport activities, where
higher frequency of physical activity leads to increased mental
health (Murphy et al., 2022; Nweke et al., 2022; Shaw et al.,
2022).
In addition, as suggested by numerous authors such as Greiner
(2019), Quail (2019), Forrester (2020), Vitale and Liu (2020), Weiss
et al. (2021), Atkinson et al. (2022); pickleball is a sport-physical
activity with a very low prevalence of accidents and injuries. This
means that it is a safe sport with few risks to people’s health.
The interest in bringing pickleball to education has not been
non-existent, but it has been very discreet, with different proposals
spread out over time. Works such as those of Davis (1976),
Wasem (1994) or more recently Michael and Webster (2020).
This is striking, given that this sporting practice is of interest in
the field of education as a new tool for working with students.
Physical education should be shown as a subject in favor of social
inclusion, of a socializing nature without excluding anyone on
the basis of age, gender, functional diversity, culture, ethnicity
or race. It should be a tool for inclusion that reaches the most
excluded sectors (Levoratti and Zambaglione, 2015). Given the
need to implement measures that encourage new forms of personal
constructions that respect diversity, improving personal potential
(Águila et al., 2020), new skills and new knowledge are acquired that
help to know oneself, where each member interacts and contributes
their personality regardless of the capabilities of each person.
Everyone must participate equally. Work through interventions
that improve diversity and inclusion (Lirola, 2020; Lirola et al.,
2020).
Similarly, the results seem to suggest the inclusive possibilities
regarding gender in this sport. Unlike what happens in most
physical-sports activities, where women have less presence and
participation and the gender role is more pronounced (VicentePedraz and Paz Brozas-Polo, 2017; Piedra, 2019). The data seem
to indicate a greater participation equality between men and
women in the habitual practice of pickleball. Of the total sample
of studies, 761 men and 723 women were identified as playing
pickleball. This may be largely due to the very characteristics of
this game that make it so peculiar and suitable for all audiences,
together with a regulation that encourages mixed play in a
completely natural way, unlike other racket sports where women
encounter numerous barriers during its practice (Ferrer Suárez et al.,
2022).
As limitations of this study, having used specific search tools
(Scopus, PubMed, WoS, Psychoinfo, Elsevier, Dialnet, and EBSCO)
there is a possibility of loss of research articles. Mention the
need to analyze studies in languages other than those known
to the author, if any. It should also be added that the sample
analyzed in the studies is completely limited to older people, so
it would be necessary to consider new studies in populations with
different characteristics. Finally, it is necessary to mention that
most of the articles reviewed were correlational studies. There



is a notable lack of longitudinal, experimental, and qualitative
studies examining the effects of this physical-sports practice. This
is certainly a clear difference with existing studies in other racquet
sports, where several longitudinal studies can be found (GutiérrezÁlvarez et al., 2022; Li, 2022; Martínez-Gallego et al., 2022).
Therefore, the existing studies to date examining the relationship
between pickleball and mental health suggest certain associations
between both variables, but no clear benefits of pickleball practice
on the mental health of people who practice this sport can
be attributed. This indicates that we are dealing with a field
that is emerging at the moment, a new field that poses the
need to carry out new lines of research of an experimental and
qualitative nature, in order to cover the possibilities of this new
modality.

## Conclusion


The review carried out in this study shows the potential
of pickleball as a new tool to work on and improve people’s
mental health. This sport is very striking, because from its
own conception and nature it becomes an inclusive sport that
does not need adaptations to be attractive to anyone. The
results of the studies reviewed show associations between the
use of pickleball and psychological variables; however, cause-effect
relationships between both constructs cannot be established given
the scarcity of experimental and longitudinal studies. This review
makes clear the need to continue exploring the possibilities of
this new game, still largely unknown, but which is gradually
making its way into our society. Given the possibilities and
applications, future studies should clarify the role that pickleball
can play in improving mental health. Thus, the results of future
studies should determine to what extent this sport is of interest
to be worked in populations with mental disorders, given the
accessibility of this sport, which can be fun and innovative,
helping to generate healthy and active habits in a population
that tends to go more unnoticed by society. This review, with
its possible limitations, should only be seen as a starting point
for future research related to the field of physical activity, sport,
and mental health.

## Data availability statement


The original contributions presented in this study are included in
the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can be directed
to the corresponding author.

## Author contributions


AC: conceptualization, visualization, and supervision. J-LC
and M-JL: methodology. M-JL and AC: validation and resources.
J-LC: investigation and writing—original draft preparation. M-JL:
writing—review and editing. All authors read and agreed to the
published version of the manuscript.



[Frontiers in Psychology](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/psychology) 07 [frontiersin.org](https://www.frontiersin.org/)


Cerezuela et al. [10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1137047](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1137047)


## Funding

This work has been financed with the support of a project of
the Andalusian Knowledge Agency (Ref. P20_00232). Furthermore,
Junta de Andalucía (DOC_01290) makes postdoctoral contract
possible by its Directorate-General for Research and Knowledge
Transfer awarded to M-JL.

## Conflict of interest


The authors declare that the research was conducted
in the absence of any commercial or financial relationships

## References


Águila, C., Sicilia, Á., and Segovia, L. (2020). El ideal de cuerpo delgado y la formación
del sujeto neoliberal: Un estudio de caso. _Rev. Mov._ [26:e26084. doi: 10.22456/1982-8918.](https://doi.org/10.22456/1982-8918.104124)
[104124](https://doi.org/10.22456/1982-8918.104124)


Armstrong, L. E., and VanHeest, J. L. (2002). The unknown mechanism of the
overtraining syndrome. _Sport Med._ [32, 185–209. doi: 10.2165/00007256-200232030-](https://doi.org/10.2165/00007256-200232030-00003)
[00003](https://doi.org/10.2165/00007256-200232030-00003)


Atkinson, C. F., Patron, M. E., and Joondeph, B. C. (2022). Retinal tears
due to pickleball injury. _Retin. Cases Brief Rep._ [16, 312–313. doi: 10.1097/ICB.](https://doi.org/10.1097/ICB.0000000000000965)
[0000000000000965](https://doi.org/10.1097/ICB.0000000000000965)


Blumenthal, J. A., Babyak, M. A., Doraiswamy, P. M., Watkins, L., Hoffman, B. M.,
Barbour, K. A., et al. (2007). Exercise and pharmacotherapy in the treatment of major
depressive disorder. _Psychosom. Med._ 69, 587–596.


Bunker, D., and Thorpe, R. (1982). A model for the teaching of games in secondary
schools. _Bull. Phys. Educ._ 18, 5–8.


Buzzelli, A. A., and Draper, J. A. (2020). Examining the motivation and perceived
benefits of pickleball participation in older adults. _J. Aging Phys. Act._ [28, 180–186. doi:](https://doi.org/10.1123/japa.2018-0413)
[10.1123/japa.2018-0413](https://doi.org/10.1123/japa.2018-0413)


Cangas, A., López, A., Orta, A., Gallego, J., Alias, A., Soriano, C., et al. (2019).
“Inclúyete”: Programa socioeducativo e inclusivo para personas con Trastorno Mental
Grave y estudiantes en la Universidad de Almería. _Edupsykhé Rev. Psicol. Educ._ 16, 86–97.
[doi: 10.57087/edupsykhe.v16i1.4085](https://doi.org/10.57087/edupsykhe.v16i1.4085)


Cangas, A. J., Navarro, N., Parra, J. M. A., Ojeda, J. J., Cangas, D., Piedra, J. A.,
et al. (2017). Stigma-stop: A serious game against the stigma toward mental health in
educational settings. _Front. Psychol._ [8:1385. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01385](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01385)


Casado, D. G., Cangas, A. J., and Ruano, Á. M. (2020). La importancia de la actividad
deportiva en la recuperación y la inclusión social de personas con trastorno mental grave.
_Educ. Soc._ [10–13. Available online at: https://raco.cat/index.php/EducacioSocial/article/](https://raco.cat/index.php/EducacioSocial/article/view/365463)
[view/365463 (accessed June 28, 2022).](https://raco.cat/index.php/EducacioSocial/article/view/365463)


Casper, J. M., Bocarro, J. N., and Lothary, A. F. (2021). An examination of pickleball
participation, social connections, and psychological well-being among seniors during the
COVID-19 pandemic. _World Leis. J._ [63, 330–346. doi: 10.1080/16078055.2021.1957708](https://doi.org/10.1080/16078055.2021.1957708)


Casper, J. M., and Jeon, J.-H. (2019). Psychological connection to pickleball: Assessing
motives and participation in older adults. _J. Aging Phys. Act._ [27, 28–33. doi: 10.1123/japa.](https://doi.org/10.1123/japa.2017-0381)
[2017-0381](https://doi.org/10.1123/japa.2017-0381)


Changstrom, B., McBride, A., and Khodaee, M. (2021). Epidemiology of racket and
paddle sports-related injuries treated in the United States emergency departments,
2007–2016. _Phys. Sportsmed._ [50, 197–204. doi: 10.1080/00913847.2021.1892467](https://doi.org/10.1080/00913847.2021.1892467)


Chen, Q., Chou, C. Y., Chen, C.-C., Lin, J.-W., and Hsu, C.-H. (2021). The effect
of leisure involvement and leisure satisfaction on the well-being of pickleball players.
_Sustainability_ [14:152. doi: 10.3390/su14010152](https://doi.org/10.3390/su14010152)


Chillón-Garzón, P., Delgado-Fernández, M., Tercedor-Sánchez, P., and GonzálezGross, M. (2002). Actividad físico-deportiva en escolares adolescentes. _Retos_ 3, 5–12.


Davis, R. (1976). Pickle Ball. _J. Phys. Educ. Recreat._ 47, 48–48.


Deslandes, A., Moraes, H., Ferreira, C., Veiga, H., Silveira, H., Mouta, R., et al. (2009).
Exercise and mental health: Many reasons to move. _Neuropsychobiology_ 59, 191–198.
[doi: 10.1080/00971170.1976.10614226](https://doi.org/10.1080/00971170.1976.10614226)


Ferrer Suárez, I., Stambulova, N., Borrueco Carmona, M., and Torregrossa, M. (2022).
Maternidad en el tenis profesional:¿es suficiente con cambiar la normativa? _Cuad. Psicol._
_Deport._ [22, 47–61. doi: 10.6018/cpd.475621](https://doi.org/10.6018/cpd.475621)


Forrester, M. B. (2020). Pickleball-related injuries treated in emergency departments.
_J. Emerg. Med._ [58, 275–279. doi: 10.1016/j.jemermed.2019.09.016](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jemermed.2019.09.016)



that could be construed as a potential conflict of
interest.

## Publisher’s note


All claims expressed in this article are solely those
of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of
their affiliated organizations, or those of the publisher,
the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may be
evaluated in this article, or claim that may be made by
its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or endorsed by the
publisher.


Gallego, J., Cangas, A. J., Aguilar, J. M., Trigueros, R., Navarro, N., Galván, B., et al.
(2020). Education students’ stigma toward mental health problems: A cross-cultural
comparison. _Front. Psychiatry_ [11:587321. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2020.587321](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2020.587321)


Gill, P. S., and Swartz, T. B. (2019). A characterization of the degree of weak and strong
links in doubles sports. _J. Quant. Anal. Sport_ [15, 155–162. doi: 10.1515/jqas-2018-0080](https://doi.org/10.1515/jqas-2018-0080)


Granero-Gallegos, A., González-Quílez, A., Plews, D., and Carrasco-Poyatos, M.
(2020). HRV-based training for improving VO2max in endurance athletes. A systematic
review with meta-analysis. _Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health_ [17:7999. doi: 10.3390/](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17217999)
[ijerph17217999](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17217999)


Greiner, N. (2019). Pickleball: Injury considerations in an increasingly popular sport.
_Mo. Med._ 116, 488–491.


Gutiérrez-Álvarez, C., Colomar, J., Baiget, E., Villafaina, S., and Fuentes-García, J. P.
(2022). Effects of 4 weeks of variability of practice training in padel double right wall: A
randomized controlled trial. _Motor Control_ [26, 278–290. doi: 10.1123/mc.2021-0095](https://doi.org/10.1123/mc.2021-0095)


Heo, J., Ryu, J., Yang, H., Kim, A. C. H., and Rhee, Y. (2018a). Importance of playing
pickleball for older adults’ subjective well-being: A serious leisure perspective. _J. Posit._
_Psychol._ [13, 67–77. doi: 10.1080/17439760.2017.1374438](https://doi.org/10.1080/17439760.2017.1374438)


Heo, J., Ryu, J., Yang, H., and Kim, K. M. (2018b). Serious leisure and depression in
older adults: A study of pickleball players. _Leis. Stud._ [37, 561–573. doi: 10.1080/02614367.](https://doi.org/10.1080/02614367.2018.1477977)
[2018.1477977](https://doi.org/10.1080/02614367.2018.1477977)


Hosker, D. K., Elkins, R. M., and Potter, M. P. (2019). Promoting mental
health and wellness in youth through physical activity, nutrition, and sleep.
_Child_ _Adolesc._ _Psychiatr._ _Clin._ _N._ _Am._ 28, 171–193. doi: [10.1016/j.chc.2018.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chc.2018.11.010)
[11.010](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chc.2018.11.010)


International Federation of Pickleball (IFP) (2022). _Official rulebook [Internet]_ .
[Available online at: https://www.ifpickleball.org/official-rulebook (accessed December](https://www.ifpickleball.org/official-rulebook)
30, 2022).


Kandola, A., Ashdown-Franks, G., Hendrikse, J., Sabiston, C. M., and Stubbs, B. (2019).
Physical activity and depression: Towards understanding the antidepressant mechanisms
of physical activity. _Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev._ [107, 525–539. doi: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.09.040)
[09.040](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.09.040)


Kim, A. C. H., Ryu, J., Lee, C., Kim, K. M., and Heo, J. (2021). Sport participation and
happiness among older adults: A mediating role of social capital. _J. Happiness Stud._ 22,
[1623–1641. doi: 10.1007/s10902-020-00288-8](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10902-020-00288-8)


Kim, I., Oh, D., Kim, M., and Cho, K. (2020). Teaching pickleball with in-depth content
knowledge in middle school physical education. _J. Phys. Educ. Recreat. Danc._ 91, 29–38.
[doi: 10.1080/07303084.2020.1798309](https://doi.org/10.1080/07303084.2020.1798309)


Lawrence, D., Kisely, S., and Pais, J. (2010). The epidemiology of excess mortality
in people with mental illness. _Can. J. Psychiatry_ [55, 752–760. doi: 10.1177/](https://doi.org/10.1177/070674371005501202)
[070674371005501202](https://doi.org/10.1177/070674371005501202)


Lera-López, F., and Suárez-Fernández, M. J. (2019). Práctica deportiva y políticas
públicas en el deporte en España. _Papeles Econ. Esp._ 226–240.


Levoratti, A., and Zambaglione, D. (2015). “La recreación y el deporte social como
medio de inclusión,” in _Berazategui_, eds Y. Pinchiroli and P. Quaini (Buenos Aires:
Engranajes de la cultura).


Li, X. (2022). Application of physical training in injury rehabilitation in table tennis
athletes. _Rev. Bras. Med. do Esporte_ [28, 483–485. doi: 10.1155/2021/1152368](https://doi.org/10.1155/2021/1152368)


Lirola, M. J. (2020). “Propuestas de innovación docente en el ámbito de la Educación
Física,” in _Las metodologías didácticas innovadoras como estrategia para afrontar los_
_desafíos educativos del siglo XXI [Internet]_, eds N. Gómez-López and J. FernándezCampoy (Madrid: Dykinson), 219–238.



[Frontiers in Psychology](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/psychology) 08 [frontiersin.org](https://www.frontiersin.org/)


Cerezuela et al. [10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1137047](https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1137047)



Lirola, M. J., Ruiz-Rico, G., Hernández Rodríguez, A. I., and Prados Megías, M. E.
(2020). “Proyecto de innovación sobre diversidad e inclusión en el contexto universitario:
La motricidad como medio de aprendizaje,” in _Investigación, innovación docente y_
_TIC Nuevos horizontes educativos_, eds S. Alonso-García, J. M. Romero Rodríguez, C.
Rodríguez Jiménez, and J. M. Sola Reche (Madrid: Dykinson), 505–515.


Mandini, S., Morelli, M., Belvederi Murri, M., Grassi, L., Masotti, S., Simani, L., et al.
(2022). Adherence to a guided walking program with amelioration of cognitive functions
in subjects with schizophrenia even during COVID-19 pandemic. _BMC Sports Sci. Med._
_Rehabil._ [14:48. doi: 10.1186/s13102-022-00440-2](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13102-022-00440-2)


Manresa-Rocamora, A., Sarabia, J. M., Javaloyes, A., Flatt, A. A., and Moya-Ramón, M.
(2021). Heart rate variability-guided training for enhancing cardiac-vagal modulation,
aerobic fitness, and endurance performance: A methodological systematic review with
meta-analysis. _Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health_ [18:10299. doi: 10.3390/ijerph181910299](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph181910299)


Martínez-Gallego, R., Villafaina, S., Crespo, M., and Fuentes-García, J. P. (2022).
Gender and age influence in pre-competitive and post-competitive anxiety in young
tennis players. _Sustainability_ [14:4966. doi: 10.3390/su14094966](https://doi.org/10.3390/su14094966)


Medellín Ruiz, J. P., Rubio-Arias, J. Á., Clemente-Suarez, V. J., and Ramos-Campo,
D. J. (2020). Effectiveness of training prescription guided by heart rate variability
versus predefined training for physiological and aerobic performance improvements: A
systematic review and meta-analysis. _Appl. Sci._ [10:8532. doi: 10.3390/app10238532](https://doi.org/10.3390/app10238532)


Michael, R., and Webster, C. (2020). Pickleball assessment of skill and tactics. _Strategies_
[33, 18–24. doi: 10.1080/08924562.2019.1705217](https://doi.org/10.1080/08924562.2019.1705217)


Moher, D. (2009). Preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses:
The PRISMA statement. _Ann. Intern. Med._ [151:264. doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-151-4-](https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-151-4-200908180-00135)
[200908180-00135](https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-151-4-200908180-00135)


Murphy, J., Sweeney, M. R., and McGrane, B. (2022). The effect of a games-based
intervention on wellbeing in adolescent girls. _Health Educ. J._ [81, 463–478. doi: 10.1177/](https://doi.org/10.1177/00178969221090583)
[00178969221090583](https://doi.org/10.1177/00178969221090583)


Nweke, M., Mshunqane, N., Govender, N., Akinpelu, A. O., and Ogunniyi, A. (2022).
Effects of aerobic exercise on quality of life of people with HIV-associated neurocognitive
disorder on antiretroviral therapy: A randomised controlled trial. _BMC Infect Dis._ 22:419.
[doi: 10.1186/s12879-022-07389-0](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12879-022-07389-0)


Page, M. J., McKenzie, J. E., Bossuyt, P. M., Boutron, I., Hoffmann, T. C., Mulrow,
C. D., et al. (2021). Declaración PRISMA 2020: Una guía actualizada para la publicación
de revisiones sistemáticas. _Rev. Esp. Cardiol._ 74, 790–799.


Piedra, J. (2019). Gender perspective in sociology of sport in Spain: Present and future.
_Rev. Esp. Sociol._ 28, 489–500.


Portugal, E., Cevada, T., Sobral Monteiro-Junior, R., Teixeira Guimarães, T., da
Cruz Rubini, E., Lattari, E., et al. (2013). Neuroscience of exercise: From neurobiology
mechanisms to mental health. _Neuropsychobiology_ [68, 1–14. doi: 10.1159/00035](https://doi.org/10.1159/000350946)
[0946](https://doi.org/10.1159/000350946)


Quail, M. T. (2019). Caring for patients with pickleball injuries. _Nursing_ 49, 16–17.
[doi: 10.1097/01.NURSE.0000554213.78933.4a](https://doi.org/10.1097/01.NURSE.0000554213.78933.4a)


Reynolds, E., Daum, D. N., Frimming, R., and Ehlman, K. (2016). Pickleball transcends
the generations in Southwest Indiana: A university and area agency on aging partnership
changing the face of aging. _J. Intergener. Relatsh._ [14, 242–251. doi: 10.1080/15350770.](https://doi.org/10.1080/15350770.2016.1194730)
[2016.1194730](https://doi.org/10.1080/15350770.2016.1194730)


Rodriguez-Ayllon, M., Cadenas-Sánchez, C., Estévez-López, F., Muñoz, N. E., MoraGonzalez, J., Migueles, J. H., et al. (2019). Role of physical activity and sedentary
behavior in the mental health of preschoolers, children and adolescents: A systematic
review and meta-analysis. _Sport Med._ [49, 1383–1410. doi: 10.1007/s40279-019-](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40279-019-01099-5)
[01099-5](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40279-019-01099-5)


Ryu, J., Heo, J., Lee, C., Kim, A. C. H., and Kim, K. M. (2020). Feeling authentic during
playing pickleball in later life: Predicting positive psychological functioning. _Soc. Sci. J._
[57, S518–S519. doi: 10.1093/geroni/igz038.1911](https://doi.org/10.1093/geroni/igz038.1911)


Ryu, J., Yang, H., Kim, A. C. H., Kim, K. M., and Heo, J. (2018). Understanding
pickleball as a new leisure pursuit among older adults. _Educ. Gerontol._ 44, 128–138.
[doi: 10.1080/03601277.2018.1424507](https://doi.org/10.1080/03601277.2018.1424507)



Schaal, K., Tafflet, M., Nassif, H., Thibault, V., Pichard, C., Alcotte, M., et al. (2011).
Psychological balance in high level athletes: Gender-based differences and sport-specific
patterns. _PLoS One_ [6:e19007. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019007](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0019007)


Schetter, C. D., and Dolbier, C. (2011). Resilience in the context of chronic stress and
health in adults. _Soc. Personal. Psychol Compass_ [5, 634–652. doi: 10.1111/j.1751-9004.](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1751-9004.2011.00379.x)
[2011.00379.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1751-9004.2011.00379.x)


Shaw, J. F., Pilon, S., Vierula, M., and McIsaac, D. I. (2022). Predictors of adherence
to prescribed exercise programs for older adults with medical or surgical indications for
exercise: A systematic review. _Syst. Rev._ [11:80. doi: 10.1186/s13643-022-01966-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s13643-022-01966-9)


Silverman, M. N., and Deuster, P. A. (2014). Biological mechanisms underlying the role
of physical fitness in health and resilience. _Interface Focus_ [4:20140040. doi: 10.1098/rsfs.](https://doi.org/10.1098/rsfs.2014.0040)
[2014.0040](https://doi.org/10.1098/rsfs.2014.0040)


Stebbins, R. (2016). _Serious leisure : A perspective for our time (Paperback edition)_

_[Internet]_ [. Available online at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/279449202](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/279449202)
(accessed October, 2022).


Stubbs, B., Williams, J., Gaughran, F., and Craig, T. (2016). How sedentary are people
with psychosis? A systematic review and meta-analysis. _Schizophr. Res._ 171, 103–109.
[doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2016.01.034](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.schres.2016.01.034)


To, Q. G., Vandelanotte, C., Cope, K., Khalesi, S., Williams, S. L., Alley, S. J., et al.
(2022). The association of resilience with depression, anxiety, stress and physical activity
during the COVID-19 pandemic. _BMC Public Health_ [22:491. doi: 10.1186/s12889-022-](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-022-12911-9)
[12911-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12889-022-12911-9)


United States Amateur Pickleball Association (2022). _History of the game [Internet]_ .
[Available online at: https://www.usapa.org/history-of-the-game/ (accessed July 28,](https://www.usapa.org/history-of-the-game/)
2022).


Vicente-Pedraz, M., and Paz Brozas-Polo, M. (2017). Sexo y género en la contienda
identitaria del deporte. Propuesta de un debate sobre la competición deportiva
multigénero (Sex and gender in the contest of identity in sport. A proposal for a debate
on multi-gender sports competition). _Cult. Cienc. Deport._ [12, 101–110. doi: 10.12800/ccd.](https://doi.org/10.12800/ccd.v12i35.881)
[v12i35.881](https://doi.org/10.12800/ccd.v12i35.881)


Vitale, K., and Liu, S. (2020). Pickleball: Review and clinical recommendations
for this fast-growing sport. _Curr. Sports Med. Rep._ [19, 406–413. doi: 10.1249/JSR.](https://doi.org/10.1249/JSR.0000000000000759)
[0000000000000759](https://doi.org/10.1249/JSR.0000000000000759)


Von Elm, E., Altman, D. G., Egger, M., Pocock, S. J., Gøtzsche, P. C., and
Vandenbroucke, J. P. (2007). The strengthening the reporting of observational studies in
epidemiology (STROBE) statement: Guidelines for reporting observational studies. _Prev._
_Med._ [45, 247–251. doi: 10.1016/j.ypmed.2007.08.012](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ypmed.2007.08.012)


Walter, K. H., Otis, N. P., Del Re, A. C., Kohen, C. B., Glassman, L. H., Ober, K. M.,
et al. (2021). The National Veterans Summer Sports Clinic: Change and duration of
psychological outcomes. _Psychol. Sport Exerc._ [55:101939. doi: 10.1016/j.psychsport.2021.](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychsport.2021.101939)
[101939](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychsport.2021.101939)


Wasem, J. (1994). Pickleball: A comprehensive skills test. _Strategies_ [7, 21–25. doi:](https://doi.org/10.1080/08924562.1994.10591973)
[10.1080/08924562.1994.10591973](https://doi.org/10.1080/08924562.1994.10591973)


Weiss, H., Dougherty, J., and DiMaggio, C. (2021). Non-fatal senior pickleball and
tennis-related injuries treated in United States emergency departments, 2010–2019. _Inj._
_Epidemiol._ [8:34. doi: 10.1186/s40621-021-00327-9](https://doi.org/10.1186/s40621-021-00327-9)


White, R. L., Babic, M. J., Parker, P. D., Lubans, D. R., Astell-Burt, T., and Lonsdale,
C. (2017). Domain-specific physical activity and mental health: A meta-analysis. _Am. J._
_Prev. Med._ [52, 653–666. doi: 10.1016/j.amepre.2016.12.008](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amepre.2016.12.008)


World Health Organisation Regional Office for Europe (2016). _Physical activity strategy_
_for the WHO European Region 2016–2025_ . Copenhagen: World Health Organisation
Regional Office for Europe.


Wray, P., Ward, C. K., Nelson, C., Sulzer, S. H., Dakin, C. J., Thompson, B. J., et al.
(2021). Pickleball for inactive mid-life and older adults in rural Utah: A feasibility study.
_Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health_ [18:8374. doi: 10.3390/ijerph18168374](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph18168374)


Zagrodnik, J. (2019). “You dinked my battleship”: The dinking game for pickleball skill
learning. _Strategies_ 32, 22–28.



[Frontiers in Psychology](https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/psychology) 09 [frontiersin.org](https://www.frontiersin.org/)


