Research


**JAMA Ophthalmology | Original Investigation**

## Pickleball-Related Ocular Injuries Among Patients Presenting to Emergency Departments


Corey R. Lacher, MD; Irene Koc, MD; Jonathan C. Tsui, MD


**IMPORTANCE** Pickleball has experienced a surge in participation over the past decade, yet the
epidemiology of pickleball-related ocular injuries remains unexplored.


**OBJECTIVE** To assess the incidence of and examine demographic factors associated with
pickleball-related ocular injuries over the past 20 years.


**DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS** This cross-sectional study used the National Electronic
Injury Surveillance System (NEISS) database published by the US Consumer Product Safety
Commission, which is based on a nationally representative probability sample of hospitals
in the US and its territories. A population-based sample of cases was obtained by selecting
patients who presented to NEISS-affiliated emergency departments with pickleball-related
ocular injuries from 2005 to 2024. This resulted in a weighted estimate of ocular injuries
nationally. Data were analyzed from October 6, 2024 to July 9, 2025.


**EXPOSURE** Participation in pickleball.


**MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES** The main outcomes were the unweighted number and
weighted number (percentage) of pickleball-related ocular injuries. Demographic information
including age, sex, treatment year, and laterality of the injury were collected. The mechanisms
of eye injuries and types of eye injuries were also assessed.


**RESULTS** Between 2005 and 2024, there were an estimated 3112 (unweighted n = 73)
pickleball-related ocular injuries with an estimated 1262 (unweighted n = 33) ocular injuries
occurring in 2024 alone. Based on a survey-weighted linear regression, the estimated
incidence of pickleball-related eye injuries increased by 405 cases (95% CI, 288-522 cases;
_P_ = .004) annually from 2021 to 2024. There were more pickleball-related ocular injuries
among patients aged 50 years or older than among patients younger than 50 years
(difference, 39%; 95% CI, 6%-65%; _P_ = .03). Severe eye injuries included retinal
detachment, orbital fracture, globe trauma, and hyphema. Mechanisms of injury included
direct hit by a pickleball, direct hit by a paddle, and falls.


**CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE** This study found that pickleball-related eye injuries have
increased at an alarming rate over the past 4 years as the sport continues to grow
in popularity. Eye protection is not currently mandated for casual or professional play.
Establishing standardized guidelines for eye protection is recommended to reduce the risk
of ocular injuries among players.


_JAMA Ophthalmol_ [. 2025;143(11):938-944. doi:10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2025.3577](https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2025.3577?utm_campaign=articlePDF%26utm_medium=articlePDFlink%26utm_source=articlePDF%26utm_content=jamaophthalmol.2025.3577)
Published online October 16, 2025.



[Invited Commentary page 944](https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2025.3882?utm_campaign=articlePDF%26utm_medium=articlePDFlink%26utm_source=articlePDF%26utm_content=jamaophthalmol.2025.3577)


[Supplemental content](https://jamanetwork.com/journals/oph/fullarticle/10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2025.3577?utm_campaign=articlePDF%26utm_medium=articlePDFlink%26utm_source=articlePDF%26utm_content=jamaophthalmol.2025.3577)


**Author Affiliations:** Department of
Ophthalmology & Visual Science,
Rutgers New Jersey Medical School,
Newark (Lacher, Tsui); Rutgers
Robert Wood Johnson Medical
School, New Brunswick, New Jersey
(Koc); Department of
Ophthalmology, Veterans Affairs
New Jersey Healthcare System,
East Orange (Tsui).


**Corresponding Author:** Jonathan C.
Tsui, MD, Department of
Ophthalmology, Veterans Affairs NJ
Healthcare System, 385 Tremont Ave,
[East Orange, NJ 07018 (jonathan.tsui](mailto:jonathan.tsui@va.gov)
[@va.gov).](mailto:jonathan.tsui@va.gov)



**938** **(Reprinted)** [jamaophthalmology.com](http://www.jamaophthalmology.com?utm_campaign=articlePDF%26utm_medium=articlePDFlink%26utm_source=articlePDF%26utm_content=jamaophthalmol.2025.3577)


© 2025 American Medical Association. All rights reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.


Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by M.I.T. Libraries user on 02/27/2026


Pickleball-Related Ocular Injuries Presenting to Emergency Departments Original Investigation Research



nvented in 1965 in Washington State, pickleball is a paddle
sport that combines elements of tennis, badminton, and
ping-pongandisplayedona6.0 × 13.2-m(20 × 44-ft)court
# I
with a perforated ball. [1] Pickleball has increased in popularity
in the United States, with approximately 19.8 million players
in the US as of 2024. [2-4] The sport’s low-impact nature and
straightforward rules contribute to its broad appeal and accessibility. As a result, the number of people engaged in the
sport has increased 44% from 2023 to 2024 and an impressive 311% since 2020. [5]

Pickleball has also increased in player age diversity. Although often associated with older age groups, recent trends
showanotableincreaseinyoungerplayerparticipationaswell.
In fact, the age range of 25 to 34 years has become the largest
group, comprising 2.3 million participants. [6] The increasing
popularity of pickleball across age groups highlights the growing need for public awareness of associated injuries. In 2023
alone, the estimated health care costs for all pickleballrelated injuries, including eye injuries, ranged from $250 million to $500 million. [7] Many studies have explored injuries
associatedwithracketsports,includingtennis,badminton,and
racquetball. [8-13] Althoughtheliteratureonpickleball-relatedinjuries has been expanding, to our knowledge, no epidemiologic studies have specifically focused on the incidence of ocular injuries. [14-19] This study analyzes pickleball-associated eye
injuries among patients evaluated in emergency departments (EDs) using a national database in the United States
between 2005 and 2024.


Methods


Database
Thisretrospectiveobservationalstudyuseddataobtainedfrom
the National Electronic Injury Surveillance System (NEISS), a
government-funded database of deidentified patient informationoperatedbytheUSConsumerProductSafetyCommission.
The Rutgers University Institutional Review Board determined
the study to be nonhuman participants research and therefore
exempt from review and informed consent. The NEISS collects
dataonconsumerproduct–relatedinjuriesfromanationallyrepresentativeprobabilitysampleofapproximately100USEDsfrom
more than 5000 hospitals nationwide. The sample is stratified
byhospitalsize,geographiclocation,andagegroupsserved.Collected data included patient demographic characteristics (age,
sex,andraceandethnicity),primarydiagnosis,injurylocation,
andmore.Eachrecordalsoincludesanarrativetextfieldthatprovides descriptive details from ED documentation regarding the
patient, history of present illness, and diagnosis. Additionally,
eachcaseisassignedastratum,primarysamplingunit,andsurveyweighttoallowforcalculationofanationallyrepresentative
estimate. [20] The Strengthening the Reporting of Observational
[Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE) reporting guideline was](http://www.equator-network.org/reporting-guidelines/strobe/)
followed. [21]


Data
Data from January 1, 2005, to December 31, 2024, were
queried, downloaded from the NEISS, and imported into



Excel, version 16.92 (Microsoft) for review, filtering, and analysis. Pickleball-related eye injuries were identified with a computer-assisted search of the narrative text field for cases with
the following: “pickleball” or “pickle ball” (n = 2443) and the
common misspellings “pickelball” or “pickel ball” (n = 39)
(Figure 1). [14] Body part codes 76 and 77 corresponding to “face”
and “eye,” respectively, were used for filtering. Nonocular injuries were excluded. Narratives of the remaining pickleballrelated injuries were then reviewed to identify eye injuries not
captured by body part codes. After appropriate case selection
of pickleball-related eye injuries, the variables analyzed included treatment year, age, sex, mechanism of eye injury (fall
related, hit by pickleball, hit by paddle, or not specified), type
of eye injury, and the laterality of the injury (right or left). Severe eye injuries were defined by the authors as those that can
result in permanent vision loss and/or require surgery. As per
the US Consumer Product Safety Commission, national estimates were considered unstable and potentially unreliable
when the estimate was less than 1200 cases, the number of
cases was less than 20, or the coefficient of variation exceeded 33%. [22]


Statistical Analysis
All statistical analyses were performed using R, version 4.5.1
(R Project for Statistical Computing) with the survey package, which accounts for the complex sampling design of the
NEISS database by incorporating case weights, stratification,
and clustering to reduce sampling error and estimate



**Key Points**


**Question** What are the incidence of and demographic factors
associated with pickleball-related ocular injuries over the past
20 years in the United States?


**Findings** In this cross-sectional study using the National
Electronic Injury Surveillance System database between 2005 and
2024, the incidence of pickleball-related ocular injuries increased
by an estimated 405 injuries per year from 2021 to 2024.


**Meaning** These findings suggest that pickleball-related ocular
injuries have increased markedly over the past 4 years
in conjunction with the sport’s growing popularity, supporting the
need to develop standardized guidelines for eye protection.


Figure 1. Pickleball-Related Eye Injury Case Selection Process From
the National Electronic Injury Surveillance System (NEISS) Database













[jamaophthalmology.com](http://www.jamaophthalmology.com?utm_campaign=articlePDF%26utm_medium=articlePDFlink%26utm_source=articlePDF%26utm_content=jamaophthalmol.2025.3577) **(Reprinted)** **JAMA Ophthalmology** November 2025 Volume 143, Number 11 **939**


© 2025 American Medical Association. All rights reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.


Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by M.I.T. Libraries user on 02/27/2026


Research Original Investigation Pickleball-Related Ocular Injuries Presenting to Emergency Departments


Figure 2. Weighted Estimates of Pickleball-Related Eye Injuries Presenting to Emergency Departments
in the US Between 2014 and 2024


1750


1500


1250


1000


750


500


250


0



2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024


Year


Figure 3. Survey-Weighted Linear Regression of Pickleball-Related Ocular Injuries Between 2021 and 2024


1750


1500


1250


1000


750


500


250


0


2021 2022 2023 2024


Year



Error bars indicate 95% CIs.


Error bars indicate 95% CIs.



variance. [23] Weighted estimates were calculated using the
sampleweightsassignedtoeachcasebytheNEISS. [20] Asurveyweighted linear regression model was used to estimate the annual increase in the incidence of ocular injuries from 2021 to
2024. Survey-weighted binomial generalized linear models
were used to compare weighted proportions between demographic subgroups. Comparisons were not performed when
subgroup data did not meet reliability criteria outlined by the
US Consumer Product Safety Commission. Wald tests were
used to assess the statistical significance of regression coefficients, with SEs estimated by Taylor series linearization and
degrees of freedom based on the survey design. _P_ < .05 was
considered statistically significant. All _P_ values were 2-sided
and were not adjusted for multiple analyses. Data were analyzed from October 6, 2024, to July 9, 2025.


Results


A total of 2472 records with pickleball-related injuries presenting to US EDs were identified between 2005 and 2024, resulting in a national estimate of 137 471 injuries. Of the 2472



records,73haddocumentedeyeinjuriesresultinginaweighted
national estimate of 3112 eye injuries. Because no pickleballrelatedeyeinjuriesweredocumentedpriorto2014,thoseyears
wereexcludedfromtheanalysis.Yearlyestimatesofpickleballrelated eye injuries are depicted in Figure 2. In the most recent year (2024), there were an estimated 1262 (n = 33) eye injuries;88%(95%CI,78%-98%)ofpickleball-relatedeyeinjuries
reported occurred between 2022 and 2024. Based on a surveyweighted linear regression model, the estimated incidence of
pickleball-related eye injuries increased by 405 cases (95% CI,
288-522cases; _P_ = .004)annuallyfrom2021to2024(Figure3).
The demographic characteristics of the patients incurring pickleball-related eye injuries are presented in Table 1. The
mean age was 53.9 years (95% CI, 46.8-61.1 years; median, 58
years[range,6-80years]).Anestimated1737eyeinjuries(56%;
unweightedn = 38)occurredamongmaleparticipants,whereas
an estimated 1375 injuries (44%; unweighted n = 35) occurred among female participants. There was no difference in
the estimated number of eye injuries sustained by male and
female participants (difference, 12%; 95% CI, −2% to 25%;
_P_ = .11). Among patients 60 years or older, there were an estimated 1619 pickleball-related eye injuries (52%; unweighted



**940** **JAMA Ophthalmology** November 2025 Volume 143, Number 11 **(Reprinted)** [jamaophthalmology.com](http://www.jamaophthalmology.com?utm_campaign=articlePDF%26utm_medium=articlePDFlink%26utm_source=articlePDF%26utm_content=jamaophthalmol.2025.3577)


© 2025 American Medical Association. All rights reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.


Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by M.I.T. Libraries user on 02/27/2026


Pickleball-Related Ocular Injuries Presenting to Emergency Departments Original Investigation Research



n = 32). An estimated 942 injuries (30%; unweighted n = 23)
occurred among patients 30 to 59 years of age, and 551 (18%;
unweighted n = 18) occurred among patients 0 to 29 years of
age. There were more estimated pickleball-related eye injuries among patients aged 50 years or older (unweighted n = 43;
weighted estimate [WE] = 2168 [70%]) compared with those
younger than 50 years (unweighted n = 30; WE = 944 [30%])
(difference, 39%; 95% CI, 6%-65%; _P_ = .03).
Raw counts and weighted estimates of ocular injury types
are presented in Table 2. Documented ocular injuries included periocular lacerations (unweighted n = 25; WE = 1112

[35%]),cornealabrasions(unweightedn = 11;WE = 490[16%]),
iritis (unweighted n = 5; WE = 237 [8%]), periocular contusions (unweighted n = 4; WE = 149 [5%]), posterior vitreous
detachment (unweighted n = 2; WE = 74 [2%]), subconjunctival hemorrhage (unweighted n = 3; WE = 162 [5%]), and
traumatic mydriasis (unweighted n = 1; WE = 51 [2%]). The
authors considered the following injuries to be severe ocular
injuries: hyphema (unweighted n = 4; WE = 141 [5%]), globe
trauma (unweighted n = 1; WE = 81 [3%]), retinal detachment (unweighted n = 2; WE = 79 [3%]), and orbital fracture
(unweighted n = 3; WE = 49 [2%]). In 13 reported cases
(WE = 516 [16%]), the type of eye injury was not specified.
The mechanisms of pickleball-related ocular injuries included direct hit by a ball (unweighted n = 34; WE = 1322

[43%]), falls (unweighted n = 18; WE = 884 [28%]), and direct
hitbyapaddle(unweightedn = 11;WE = 364[12%]).Therewas
nomechanismspecifiedin10(WE = 542[17%])reportedcases.
The mean age of patients who sustained pickleball-related eye
injuries was 68.2 years (95% CI, 65.2-71.2 years) for falls, 52.6
years(95%CI,47.0-58.2years)forball-relatedinjuries,and30.5
years (95% CI, 16.6-44.4 years) for paddle-related injuries.


Discussion


This cross-sectional study revealed that the incidence of
pickleball-related eye injuries presenting to US EDs increased
annually from 2021 to 2024, paralleling the increase in
pickleball participation. Recent surveys have demonstrated
that this growth has been primarily driven by the influx of casual players, defined as those who play fewer than 8 times per
year, rather than core players, who play 8 times per year or
more. [5] Although the increase in ocular injuries may simply reflect the increasing number of players, it is also possible that
casual players are more susceptible to injury due to limited experience, unfamiliarity with the game, or lower level of physical fitness. Further studies are needed to evaluate differences in the incidences and types of injuries between casual
and core pickleball players across age groups.
Second, most pickleball-related eye injuries in our study
occurred among older adults, with 70% of all eye injuries reported in players aged 50 years or older. The increased vulnerability of this population to sports-related injuries may be
attributabletoage-relateddecreasesinmusclemass,bonedensity, and balance. [24] Thus, for players in this age group, potential strategies to prevent eye injuries include strength and balance training, stretching and warming up prior to play, and use



Table 1. Demographic Characteristics of Patients
With Pickleball-Related Ocular Injuries


a Data not available.


Table 2. Diagnoses and Mechanisms of Injury Among Patients
With Pickleball-Related Ocular Injuries


Abbreviations: PVD, posterior vitreous detachment; SCH, subconjunctival
hemorrhage.

a Data not available.


of proper equipment, including court shoes. Eye protection
should be emphasized, especially for players who use nonshatterproofspectacles,thosewithhighmyopiaorafamilyhistoryofretinaldetachment,andplayerswithcataractswhomay
experience blur or glare. [25] Although patients aged 50 years or
older represented the majority of cases in our study, this proportion was lower than the 91% reported by Forrester [15] when
analyzingallpickleball-relatedinjuriesbetween2001and2017.
This difference may reflect the increasing participation of
younger individuals in the sport, with the average player age
decreasing to 34.8 years as of 2024. [6]

The severity of ocular injuries varied widely among patients presenting to the ED. Less severe injuries included periocular lacerations, corneal abrasions, iritis, periocular



[jamaophthalmology.com](http://www.jamaophthalmology.com?utm_campaign=articlePDF%26utm_medium=articlePDFlink%26utm_source=articlePDF%26utm_content=jamaophthalmol.2025.3577) **(Reprinted)** **JAMA Ophthalmology** November 2025 Volume 143, Number 11 **941**


© 2025 American Medical Association. All rights reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.


Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by M.I.T. Libraries user on 02/27/2026


Research Original Investigation Pickleball-Related Ocular Injuries Presenting to Emergency Departments



contusions, posterior vitreous detachments, subconjunctival
hemorrhage, and traumatic mydriasis. Although posterior vitreous detachments diagnosed following trauma may not be
considered ocular injuries, they were included in this analysis given their association with retinal pathology. [26] Severe and
vision-threatening ocular injuries included retinal detachments, globe trauma, orbital fractures, and hyphema. As the
dataset provides no longitudinal or visual acuity data, it is possible that the true visual and financial burden of these injuries extends beyond what is reported due to subsequent costs
of follow-up and/or intervention. For example, a study conducted at Helsinki University Eye Hospital between 2011 and
2012 reported that the 3-month follow-up cost associated with
orbital fractures averaged €6050 (approximately $7100)
per patient. [27] Further studies should evaluate the long-term
visual outcomes of pickleball-associated eye injuries and the
potential health system costs savings associated with injury
prevention.
An estimated 43% of eye injuries in this study were attributable to direct pickleball impact, underscoring the role of ball
speed and force in ocular injury risk. Biomechanical analyses
have demonstrated that a pickleball traveling faster than 82
km/h(30mph)candeformthecornea,retina,andvitreousand
can exert zonular stress sufficient to dislocate the lens. [28] This
velocity threshold has become increasingly relevant due to recent advancements in paddle technology. Modern paddles, incorporating materials such as ethylene-vinyl acetate foam, can
now generate exit velocities approaching 96 km/h (60 mph). [29]

Given that players are often positioned 4.2 m (14 ft) apart at
the “no-volley” or “kitchen” line, these high speeds leave players with limited time to react and avoid impact. [7] Understandinghowpaddlecharacteristicsaffectocularinjuryriskmayhelp
inform future safety guidelines and recommendations.
This study adds to the growing body of documented
pickleball-related ocular injuries leading to potential visual
compromise. [30-32] Atkinson et al [30] reported 2 patients who presented with retinal tears after direct hit to the eye with a
pickleball, 1 of whom had a localized retinal detachment and
vitreous hemorrhage. Huang and Greven [31] reported 2 patients
who sustained crystalline lens subluxation after being struck
by a pickleball and subsequently required scleral-fixated intraocular lens implantation. Boopathiraj et al [32] described a case of
a patient hit with a pickleball who presented with a hyphema
andintraocularpressureof62mmHg.Noneofthereportedpatients were wearing eye protection at the time of injury.
Despite the risks of eye injury, eye protection is not mandated for casual or professional pickleball players. Most recently in March 2024, USA Pickleball, the governing body for
pickleball in the United States, disapproved of a rule change
that would mandate that players wear eye protection in USA
Pickleball tournaments, citing challenges with enforcement.
Although recommendations were made for USA Pickleball to
develop a comprehensive policy on eye protection, such guidancehasyettobeissued. [33] Furthermore,manypickleballclubs
and public recreation areas do not require that players wear
eye protection. [34]

In the absence of formal guidelines for eye protection in
pickleball,theAmericanAcademyofOphthalmologypublished



2recommendationsin2024.Theysuggestthateyewearshould
meet the American Society for Testing and Materials F3164
guidelines, which is currently the standard for most racket
sports. [34,35] These guidelines outline criteria for safe designs,
optics, and materials for eye protection, including for players
whowearcorrectivespectacles. [36] However,becausethesestandards are neither mandated nor widely promoted by mainstream pickleball organizations, it is difficult to monitor protective eyewear compliance. Furthermore, many retailers may
not disclose the materials used in their frames and lenses, and
whether their products meet recommended standards. Adopting and publicizing a universal standard would simplify the
purchasing process and ensure players have access to the most
effective eye protection.
To contextualize our findings, we compared the annual
number of pickleball-related ocular injuries with ocular injuryratesreportedinotherracketandnonracketsports.Incontrast to the increasing annual incidence of pickleball-related
ocular injuries, tennis-related ocular injuries decreased from
2000 to 2019, averaging approximately 800 per year and decreasing to an estimated 450 eye injuries in 2019. [37] Baseballrelated ocular injuries followed a similar pattern, with the estimated incidence decreasing annually from 2011 to 2020 to
an estimated 200 ocular injuries in 2020. [38] Although a recent study on basketball-related eye injuries reported that an
estimated 3000 injuries occurred in 2021, the annual incidence decreased by an estimated 333 cases per year between
2012 and 2021. [39] Thus, compared with tennis, baseball, and
basketball, pickleball-related eye injuries may represent an
increasing burden of sports-related ocular trauma. Efforts to
curtail this increasing trend by increasing awareness and developing standardized guidelines for eye protection should be
considered.


Limitations
This study has several limitations. First, the sample size was
small, with only 73 reported cases identified over the 20-year
studyperiod.BecausetheNEISSdataarederivedfromasample
of approximately 100 hospitals using probability sampling, the
findingsmaynotbetrulyrepresentativeofthemorethan5000
hospitals in the United States with EDs. [40] Furthermore,
pickleball-related injuries may not have been recognized in
earlier years of the database given the sport’s lower popularity during that time period and the absence of a specific NEISS
product code. The authors attempted to capture all pickleballrelated injuries by searching among narratives and removing
product codes from the database query. However, because the
narrative text field in the NEISS was expanded from 142 to 400
charactersin2019,itispossiblethatcasesoccurringbefore2019
were not adequately documented. [22] The analysis was also limited to patients who presented to EDs, excluding those who
sought care in ophthalmology offices or other outpatient settings. Therefore, the true number of pickleball-related ocular
injuries is likely underestimated by this study, with potential
bias toward more severe cases. Moreover, more subtle diagnoses, such as traumatic macular hole, may have been missed
given the limited ophthalmic resources in most EDs. Due to
the limited detail available within the database, it is unclear



**942** **JAMA Ophthalmology** November 2025 Volume 143, Number 11 **(Reprinted)** [jamaophthalmology.com](http://www.jamaophthalmology.com?utm_campaign=articlePDF%26utm_medium=articlePDFlink%26utm_source=articlePDF%26utm_content=jamaophthalmol.2025.3577)


© 2025 American Medical Association. All rights reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.


Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by M.I.T. Libraries user on 02/27/2026


Pickleball-Related Ocular Injuries Presenting to Emergency Departments Original Investigation Research



whetherdiagnosesweremadebyophthalmologistsorbyother
medical professionals.


Conclusions


This cross-sectional study found that the annual incidence of
pickleball-related ocular injuries increased substantially from



2021 to 2024, with an estimated 1262 cases occurring in 2024
alone. Most affected individuals were 50 years of age or older.
Severe ocular injuries included retinal detachment, globe
trauma, orbital fracture, and hyphema. Currently, no official
guidelines exist regarding eye protection in pickleball. Increasingawarenessforage-specificriskfactorsandestablishingstandardized recommendations for eye protection may help
reduce injury rates and prevent vision loss.



pickleball-related hand injuries. _Hand (N Y)_ . 2025;
[20(5):790-794. doi:10.1177/15589447241238371](https://dx.doi.org/10.1177/15589447241238371)


**19** . Opara OA, Brush PL, Pohl N, et al. Pickleballand paddleball-related injuries in the lower
extremity: description, treatment options, and
return to play. _Cureus_ . 2024;16(2):e53954.
[doi:10.7759/cureus.53954](https://dx.doi.org/10.7759/cureus.53954)


**20** . National Electronic Injury Surveillance System
(NEISS) Online. Explanation of NEISS Estimates
Obtained Through the CPSC Web-site. US
Consumer Product Safety Commission. Accessed
[December 8, 2024. https://www.cpsc.gov/cgibin/](https://www.cpsc.gov/cgibin/NEISSQuery/webestimates.html)
[NEISSQuery/webestimates.html](https://www.cpsc.gov/cgibin/NEISSQuery/webestimates.html)


**21** . Vandenbroucke JP, von Elm E, Altman DG, et al;
STROBE Initiative. Strengthening the Reporting of
Observational Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE):
explanation and elaboration. _PLoS Med_ . 2007;4
[(10):e297. doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.0040297](https://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.0040297)


**22** . Explanation of NEISS Estimates Obtained
Through the CPSC Website. US Consumer Product
Safety Commission. Accessed June 22, 2025.
[https://www.cpsc.gov/Research--Statistics/NEISS-](https://www.cpsc.gov/Research--Statistics/NEISS-Injury-Data/Explanation-Of-NEISS-Estimates-Obtained-Through-The-CPSC-Website)
[Injury-Data/Explanation-Of-NEISS-Estimates-](https://www.cpsc.gov/Research--Statistics/NEISS-Injury-Data/Explanation-Of-NEISS-Estimates-Obtained-Through-The-CPSC-Website)
[Obtained-Through-The-CPSC-Website](https://www.cpsc.gov/Research--Statistics/NEISS-Injury-Data/Explanation-Of-NEISS-Estimates-Obtained-Through-The-CPSC-Website)


**23** . Lumley T. Analysis of complex survey samples.
_J Stat Software_ [. 2004;9(8):1-19. doi:10.18637/jss.](https://dx.doi.org/10.18637/jss.v009.i08)
[v009.i08](https://dx.doi.org/10.18637/jss.v009.i08)


**24** . Kallinen M, Markku A. Aging, physical activity
and sports injuries: an overview of common sports
injuries in the elderly. _Sports Med_ . 1995;20(1):41-52.
[doi:10.2165/00007256-199520010-00004](https://dx.doi.org/10.2165/00007256-199520010-00004)


**25** . Waisberg E, Ong J, Lee AG. Pickleball eye
injuries: ocular protection recommendations and
guidelines. _Eye (Lond)_ . 2024;38(6):1039-1040.
[doi:10.1038/s41433-023-02870-9](https://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41433-023-02870-9)


**26** . Nixon TRW, Davie RL, Snead MP. Posterior
vitreous detachment and retinal tear—a prospective
study of community referrals. _Eye (Lond)_ . 2024;38
[(4):786-791. doi:10.1038/s41433-023-02779-3](https://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41433-023-02779-3)


**27** . Sahraravand A, Haavisto AK, Leivo T. Resource
use and economic burden of eye injuries in
Southern Finland. _Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol_ .
[2022;260(2):637-643. doi:10.1007/s00417-021-](https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00417-021-05399-3)
[05399-3](https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00417-021-05399-3)


**28** . Rydz C, Colmenarez JA, Shahraki K, Dong P, Gu
L, Suh DW. Finite element analysis of ocular impact
forces and potential complications in
pickleball-related eye injuries. _Bioengineering (Basel)_ .
[2025;12(6):570. doi:10.3390/](https://dx.doi.org/10.3390/bioengineering12060570)
[bioengineering12060570](https://dx.doi.org/10.3390/bioengineering12060570)


**29** . Johnkew Pickleball Paddle Database. Accessed
[December 28, 2024. https://www.](https://www.johnkewpickleball.com/paddle-database)
[johnkewpickleball.com/paddle-database](https://www.johnkewpickleball.com/paddle-database)


**30** . Atkinson CF, Patron ME, Joondeph BC. Retinal
tears due to pickleball injury. _Retin Cases Brief Rep_ .
[2022;16(3):312-313. doi:10.1097/ICB.](https://dx.doi.org/10.1097/ICB.0000000000000965)
[0000000000000965](https://dx.doi.org/10.1097/ICB.0000000000000965)



ARTICLE INFORMATION


**Accepted for Publication:** July 13, 2025.


**Published Online:** October 16, 2025.
[doi:10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2025.3577](https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2025.3577?utm_campaign=articlePDF%26utm_medium=articlePDFlink%26utm_source=articlePDF%26utm_content=jamaophthalmol.2025.3577)


**Author Contributions:** Drs Lacher and Tsui had full
access to all of the data in the study and take
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the
accuracy of the data analysis.
_Concept and design:_ Lacher, Tsui.
_Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data:_
All authors.
_Drafting of the manuscript:_ All authors.
_Critical review of the manuscript for important_
_intellectual content:_ All authors.
_Statistical analysis:_ Lacher, Koc.
_Administrative, technical, or material support:_ Tsui.
_Supervision:_ Tsui.


**Conflict of Interest Disclosures:** Dr Tsui reported
receiving consulting fees from AbbVie Inc and
EyePoint and grants and unrelated research funding
from Johnson & Johnson Surgical Vision outside the
submitted work. No other disclosures were
reported.


**Meeting Presentation:** This paper was presented
at the Summer Symposium Meeting of the Women
in Ophthalmology; August 9, 2025; Amelia Island,
Florida.


**Data Sharing Statement:** [See the Supplement.](https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2025.3577?utm_campaign=articlePDF%26utm_medium=articlePDFlink%26utm_source=articlePDF%26utm_content=jamaophthalmol.2025.3577)


REFERENCES


**1** . What IS Pickleball? - USA Pickleball. Accessed
[December 8, 2024. https://usapickleball.org/what-](https://usapickleball.org/what-is-pickleball/)
[is-pickleball/](https://usapickleball.org/what-is-pickleball/)


**2** . How Pickleball Became America’s Fastest
Growing Sport. October 17, 2022. Accessed
[December 8, 2024. https://www.](https://www.nationalgeographic.com/history/article/pickleball-is-for-everyone-inside-americas-fastest-growing-sport)
[nationalgeographic.com/history/article/pickleball-](https://www.nationalgeographic.com/history/article/pickleball-is-for-everyone-inside-americas-fastest-growing-sport)
[is-for-everyone-inside-americas-fastest-growing-](https://www.nationalgeographic.com/history/article/pickleball-is-for-everyone-inside-americas-fastest-growing-sport)
[sport](https://www.nationalgeographic.com/history/article/pickleball-is-for-everyone-inside-americas-fastest-growing-sport)


**3** . America’s Fastest-Growing Sport Is Pickleball:
NPR. February 19, 2022. Accessed December 8,
[2024. https://www.npr.org/2022/02/19/](https://www.npr.org/2022/02/19/1081257674/americas-fastest-growing-sport-pickleball)
[1081257674/americas-fastest-growing-sport-](https://www.npr.org/2022/02/19/1081257674/americas-fastest-growing-sport-pickleball)
[pickleball](https://www.npr.org/2022/02/19/1081257674/americas-fastest-growing-sport-pickleball)


**4** . Sports & Fitness Industry Association (SFIA).
[2025. Accessed June 30, 2025. https://sfia.users.](https://sfia.users.membersuite.com/shop/store/f147b189-00ce-c644-c3fe-0b47ebabdede/detail?ref=thedinkpickleball.com)
[membersuite.com/shop/store/f147b189-00ce-](https://sfia.users.membersuite.com/shop/store/f147b189-00ce-c644-c3fe-0b47ebabdede/detail?ref=thedinkpickleball.com)
[c644-c3fe-0b47ebabdede/detail?ref=](https://sfia.users.membersuite.com/shop/store/f147b189-00ce-c644-c3fe-0b47ebabdede/detail?ref=thedinkpickleball.com)
[thedinkpickleball.com](https://sfia.users.membersuite.com/shop/store/f147b189-00ce-c644-c3fe-0b47ebabdede/detail?ref=thedinkpickleball.com)


**5** . Flamm J. Report: Pickleball Participation Surges
to Nearly 20 Million in 2024. March 18, 2025.
[Accessed June 30, 2025. https://www.](https://www.thedinkpickleball.com/report-pickleball-participation-surges-to-nearly-20-million-in-2024/)
[thedinkpickleball.com/report-pickleball-](https://www.thedinkpickleball.com/report-pickleball-participation-surges-to-nearly-20-million-in-2024/)
[participation-surges-to-nearly-20-million-in-2024/](https://www.thedinkpickleball.com/report-pickleball-participation-surges-to-nearly-20-million-in-2024/)


**6** . 2024 State of Pickleball Report | SFIA &
Pickleheads. November 14, 2024. Accessed
[December 14, 2024. https://sfia.org/resources/](https://sfia.org/resources/as-pickleball-continues-unprecedented-growth-in-every-age-group-and-region-for-third-straight-year-significant-investments-still-needed-for-court-and-facility-demand/)



[as-pickleball-continues-unprecedented-growth-in-](https://sfia.org/resources/as-pickleball-continues-unprecedented-growth-in-every-age-group-and-region-for-third-straight-year-significant-investments-still-needed-for-court-and-facility-demand/)
[every-age-group-and-region-for-third-straight-](https://sfia.org/resources/as-pickleball-continues-unprecedented-growth-in-every-age-group-and-region-for-third-straight-year-significant-investments-still-needed-for-court-and-facility-demand/)
[year-significant-investments-still-needed-for-court-](https://sfia.org/resources/as-pickleball-continues-unprecedented-growth-in-every-age-group-and-region-for-third-straight-year-significant-investments-still-needed-for-court-and-facility-demand/)
[and-facility-demand/](https://sfia.org/resources/as-pickleball-continues-unprecedented-growth-in-every-age-group-and-region-for-third-straight-year-significant-investments-still-needed-for-court-and-facility-demand/)


**7** . Hutton D. As Pickleball Popularity Skyrockets,
Eye Injuries from Sport Also on Rise. July 7, 2023.
[Accessed June 22, 2025. https://www.](https://www.ophthalmologytimes.com/view/as-pickleball-popularity-skyrockets-eye-injuries-from-sport-also-on-rise)
[ophthalmologytimes.com/view/as-pickleball-](https://www.ophthalmologytimes.com/view/as-pickleball-popularity-skyrockets-eye-injuries-from-sport-also-on-rise)
[popularity-skyrockets-eye-injuries-from-sport-also-](https://www.ophthalmologytimes.com/view/as-pickleball-popularity-skyrockets-eye-injuries-from-sport-also-on-rise)
[on-rise](https://www.ophthalmologytimes.com/view/as-pickleball-popularity-skyrockets-eye-injuries-from-sport-also-on-rise)


**8** . Hoskin AK, Watson S, Kamalden TA.
Badminton-related eye injuries: a systematic
review. _Inj Prev_ [. 2023;29(2):116-120. doi:10.1136/](https://dx.doi.org/10.1136/ip-2022-044564)
[ip-2022-044564](https://dx.doi.org/10.1136/ip-2022-044564)


**9** . Gescheit DT, Cormack SJ, Duffield R, et al. Injury
epidemiology of tennis players at the 2011-2016
Australian Open Grand Slam. _Br J Sports Med_ . 2017;
[51(17):1289-1294. doi:10.1136/bjsports-2016-097283](https://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bjsports-2016-097283)


**10** . Chevinsky JD, Newman JM, Shah NV, et al.
Trends and epidemiology of tennis-related
sprains/strains in the United States, 2010 to 2016.
_Surg Technol Int_ [. 2017;31:333-338.](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/29315449)


**11** . Dines JS, Bedi A, Williams PN, et al. Tennis
injuries: epidemiology, pathophysiology, and
treatment. _J Am Acad Orthop Surg_ . 2015;23(3):181[189. doi:10.5435/JAAOS-D-13-00148](https://dx.doi.org/10.5435/JAAOS-D-13-00148)


**12** . Changstrom B, McBride A, Khodaee M.
Epidemiology of racket and paddle sports-related
injuries treated in the United States emergency
departments, 2007-2016. _Phys Sportsmed_ . 2022;
[50(3):197-204. doi:10.1080/00913847.2021.1892467](https://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00913847.2021.1892467)


**13** . Nhan DT, Klyce W, Lee RJ. Epidemiological
patterns of alternative racquet-sport injuries in the
United States, 1997-2016. _Orthop J Sports Med_ .
[2018;6(7):2325967118786237. doi:10.1177/](https://dx.doi.org/10.1177/2325967118786237)
[2325967118786237](https://dx.doi.org/10.1177/2325967118786237)


**14** . Ghattas YS, Zeblisky P, Cassinat J, Aceto M,
Spindler KP, Cannada LK. Pickleball-related
fractures in the United States from 2002 to 2022:
an analysis using the NEISS database. _Orthop J_
_Sports Med_ . 2024;12(6):23259671241255674.
[doi:10.1177/23259671241255674](https://dx.doi.org/10.1177/23259671241255674)


**15** . Forrester MB. Pickleball-related injuries treated
in emergency departments. _J Emerg Med_ . 2020;
[58(2):275-279. doi:10.1016/j.jemermed.2019.09.016](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jemermed.2019.09.016)


**16** . Azar FM, Lamplot JD, Bernholt DL, Spence DD.
Pickleball: a standard review of injury prevalence
and prevention in a rapidly growing sport. _J Am_
_Acad Orthop Surg_ . 2024;32(22):e1130-e1141.
[doi:10.5435/JAAOS-D-24-00151](https://dx.doi.org/10.5435/JAAOS-D-24-00151)


**17** . Weiss H, Dougherty J, DiMaggio C. Non-fatal
senior pickleball and tennis-related injuries treated
in United States emergency departments,
2010-2019. _Inj Epidemiol_ [. 2021;8(1):34. doi:10.1186/](https://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s40621-021-00327-9)
[s40621-021-00327-9](https://dx.doi.org/10.1186/s40621-021-00327-9)


**18** . Firouzbakht PK, Bagdady K, Gupta R, Lu SM,
Chen K. Quite a pickle: a 10-year increase in



[jamaophthalmology.com](http://www.jamaophthalmology.com?utm_campaign=articlePDF%26utm_medium=articlePDFlink%26utm_source=articlePDF%26utm_content=jamaophthalmol.2025.3577) **(Reprinted)** **JAMA Ophthalmology** November 2025 Volume 143, Number 11 **943**


© 2025 American Medical Association. All rights reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.


Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by M.I.T. Libraries user on 02/27/2026


Research Original Investigation Pickleball-Related Ocular Injuries Presenting to Emergency Departments



**38** . Patel PA, Gopali R, Reddy A, Patel KK.
Baseball-related ocular injuries in the United States:
a 10-year analysis. _Expert Rev Ophthalmol_ . 2022;17
[(2):145-151. doi:10.1080/17469899.2022.2039629](https://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17469899.2022.2039629)


**39** . Kim EJ, Ganga A, Rana VK, Greenberg PB. The
epidemiology of basketball-associated eye injuries
in the United States, 2012-2021. _Graefes Arch Clin_
_Exp Ophthalmol_ . 2023;261(12):3675-3678.
[doi:10.1007/s00417-023-06136-8](https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00417-023-06136-8)


**40** . National Electronic Injury Surveillance System Explanation of NEISS Estimates. US Consumer
Product Safety Commission. Accessed December
[14, 2024. https://www.cpsc.gov/cgibin/](https://www.cpsc.gov/cgibin/NEISSQuery/webestimates.html)
[NEISSQuery/webestimates.html](https://www.cpsc.gov/cgibin/NEISSQuery/webestimates.html)



**31** . Huang H, Greven MA. Traumatic lens
subluxation from pickleball injury: a case series.
_Retin Cases Brief Rep_ [. 2024;18(1):15-17. doi:10.1097/](https://dx.doi.org/10.1097/ICB.0000000000001312)
[ICB.0000000000001312](https://dx.doi.org/10.1097/ICB.0000000000001312)


**32** . Boopathiraj N, Wagner IV, Krambeer CJ, et al. In
a pickle: Cases of pickleball related ocular injuries.
_Am J Ophthalmol Case Rep_ . 2024;35:102082.
[doi:10.1016/j.ajoc.2024.102082](https://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ajoc.2024.102082)


**33** . USA Pickleball List of Suggested Pickleball Rule
Changes for Previous Years. Accessed December
[28, 2024. https://rules.usapickleball.org/](https://rules.usapickleball.org/suggested-rule-changes-all-years/entry/1383/)
[suggested-rule-changes-all-years/entry/1383/](https://rules.usapickleball.org/suggested-rule-changes-all-years/entry/1383/)


**34** . Mukamal R. American Academy of
Ophthalmology. Wear Eye Protection When Playing
Pickleball. February 6, 2024. Accessed December
[29, 2024. https://www.aao.org/eye-health/tips-](https://www.aao.org/eye-health/tips-prevention/pickleball-eye-protection-black-eye)
[prevention/pickleball-eye-protection-black-eye](https://www.aao.org/eye-health/tips-prevention/pickleball-eye-protection-black-eye)



**35** . Welch A. More Than a Pickle: Fastest-Growing
U.S. Sport May Pose Ocular Injury Risks - American
Academy of Ophthalmology. EyeNet Magazine.
March 1, 2024. Accessed December 29, 2024.
[https://www.aao.org/eyenet/article/more-than-a-](https://www.aao.org/eyenet/article/more-than-a-pickle-ocular-injury-risks)
[pickle-ocular-injury-risks](https://www.aao.org/eyenet/article/more-than-a-pickle-ocular-injury-risks)


**36** . New Standard for Athletic Eye Protection.
ASTM F3164 - Racket Sports - ICS Inc: ICS Inc.
[Accessed December 29, 2024. https://www.icslabs.](https://www.icslabs.com/newspress/new-standard-for-athletic-eye-protection-astm-f3164-racket-sports/)
[com/newspress/new-standard-for-athletic-eye-](https://www.icslabs.com/newspress/new-standard-for-athletic-eye-protection-astm-f3164-racket-sports/)
[protection-astm-f3164-racket-sports/](https://www.icslabs.com/newspress/new-standard-for-athletic-eye-protection-astm-f3164-racket-sports/)


**37** . Patel PS, Uppuluri A, Oydanich M, Langer PD,
Zarbin MA, Bhagat N. Epidemiology of United
States tennis-related ocular injuries from 2000 to
2019. _Int Ophthalmol_ . 2023;43(3):997-1003.
[doi:10.1007/s10792-022-02502-3](https://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10792-022-02502-3)



Invited Commentary

## Benefits and Limitations of Using Population Databases for Eye Research— More Than Meets the Eye


Dolly Ann Padovani-Claudio, MD, PhD; Adam R. Glassman, MS



**Compared with single or multicenter studies,** health-related
datarepositoriesincreasethescale,scope,andpowerofresearch
aimed at identifying trends in ocular conditions across demographicgroups,geographicregions, and time periods. Re
[Related article page 938](https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama/fullarticle/10.1001/jamaophthalmol.2025.3577?utm_campaign=articlePDF%26utm_medium=articlePDFlink%26utm_source=articlePDF%26utm_content=jamaophthalmol.2025.3882) search using such databases

has numerous advantages;
however, it is important to also understand its limitations.
As a case example, we highlight work in this issue of _JAMA_
_Ophthalmology_ from Lacher et al, [1] who explored trends in
pickleball-related eye injuries using 2005 to 2024 data from
the Consumer Product Safety Commission’s National Electronic Injury Surveillance System (NEISS). [2] The NEISS contains coded entries of product-related consumer injuries derived from a sample of 100 hospital-based emergency
departments in the US. Data from this probability sample,
which represents approximately 2% of more than 5000 US
emergency departments, can be used to generate weighted
estimates of national incidence rates using a variety of statistical methods.
In addition to the NEISS, several other patient-related databases represent important resources to explore epidemiologic patterns, associations, and disparities in eye health. Some
databases, such as the NEISS and the Nationwide Emergency
DepartmentSample, [3] arebasedonemergencydepartmentdata,
whereas others include data from outpatient practices (including community-based or private practices, as well as academic
or university-based clinics) or from broader surveillance systems, surveys, or administrative data. Examples include the
AmericanAcademyofOphthalmology’sIntelligentResearchin
Sight (IRIS) [4] Registry, the University of Michigan’s Sight Outcomes Research Collaborative (SOURCE), [5] the Center for
Disease Control and Prevention’s Vision Health Surveillance
System, [6] the National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey, [7] and
the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services Transformed
Medicaid Statistical Information System [8] Analytic Files.



By including diverse and representative populations, researchusingthesedatabasesmayproduceresultsthataremore
generalizable than single-center studies. These databases also
facilitate large-scale observational studies that could otherwise be logistically and financially challenging. The results of
studies using them might support the generation of new hypotheses for prospective studies, guide comparative effectiveness research, or inform health policy measures and public
safety regulation. The latter is the case of the study by Lacher
et al, [1] which aims to raise awareness of pickleball-related eye
injuries to promote the use of protective equipment to safeguard sight.
Selecting the most appropriate dataset for each study’s objectives is critical. As mentioned, the NEISS, for example, is focused on consumer product safety. However, the NEISS is limited by the number of hospitals sampled, the lack of follow-up
data for each patient, and the restriction to emergency department visits. Other databases, however, may include data on
visittypes,diagnoses,procedures,prescriptions,orbillingsummaries. They also may include cases that were treated outside of an emergency department setting. Others also may
include information pertaining to nonocular comorbid conditions, laboratory values, or ocular or other radiologic images, potentially facilitating the examination of associations
between ocular conditions and broader clinical phenotypes.
Finally, some include longitudinal data that may allow for
the assessment of practice patterns, disease progression, or responses to therapies.
As with all sources of data, registries have inherent limitations, including potential challenges with insufficient, inaccurate, incomplete, and missing data. Human error and system-level gaps stemming from high demands on limited
resources also can affect data quality. For example, because
diagnostic and billing codes are not specifically intended for
research, coding practices can lead to misclassification bias in
data sources based on billing codes. Manual entry by coders



**944** **JAMA Ophthalmology** November 2025 Volume 143, Number 11 **(Reprinted)** [jamaophthalmology.com](http://www.jamaophthalmology.com?utm_campaign=articlePDF%26utm_medium=articlePDFlink%26utm_source=articlePDF%26utm_content=jamaophthalmol.2025.3882)


© 2025 American Medical Association. All rights reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.


Downloaded from jamanetwork.com by M.I.T. Libraries user on 02/27/2026


